tests: content for learning how to read unfamiliar tests, test syntax (#9)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-3: tests/reading-tests.md

> # Reading Tests

Reviewer: I don't see assets/tests_tests_replit-test-success.png used in this file (or any other in this PR). Can it be removed?

## Goal

> The concepts about unit testing apply across programming languages! Everything we've learned about unit testing continues to hold true.

Reviewer: smoothed out the phrasing a bit
```suggestion
Unit testing concepts apply across programming languages! Everything we've learned about unit testing principles continues to hold true.
```

- Unit tests are responsible for verifying the correctness of our code, usually on a detailed level such as how a function behaves
- We regularly run unit tests as we code

> - We use failing test messages to determine how to move forward and pass the test

Reviewer: This sounds like an observation specific to TDD. I say this because if I suddenly broke a test, I wouldn't phrase the process of figuring out what I broke as moving forward to pass the test. I would say that I was resolving a problem. This more forward looking perspective sounds like we wrote a test that encodes a specification and we are trying to write an implementation to make it pass.

Under that assumption, it sounds better to me to provide a little of that context here.
```suggestion
- When using tests to guide our development work, we use failing test messages to determine how to move forward and pass the test
```

- The steps in a test can be described as:
  - Arrange
  - Act
  - Assert

> So, luckily, when it comes to learning about testing in another programming language, we won't have a lot of new concepts!
> 
> What we _can_ focus on, then, is how we manage our transition into learning the syntax of another testing framework. Our goal for this lesson is to:

Reviewer: a little bit of smoothing.
```suggestion
When it comes to learning about testing in another programming language, we won't have a lot of new concepts!

This lets us focus on how we manage our transition into learning the syntax of another testing framework. Our goal for this lesson is to:
```

Nadia has already set up the tests for FizzBuzz. Leila wants to jump into coding, but they need to take a moment to read through the tests.

What can Leila determine from reading tests in a syntax they don't know? Let's read through one test and make predictions.

This is in a file named `test/fizzbuzz.test.js`

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
describe('fizzBuzz', () => {
  test('returns Fizz on multiples of 3', () => {
    // Arrange
    const num = 9;

    // Act
    const result = fizzBuzz(num);

    // Assert
    expect(result).toEqual('Fizz');
  });
});
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

### The File Itself

First, Leila can quickly orient themself with the file name and where it's located. It seems like there is a `test` directory, and a file named `fizzbuzz.test.js` in it.

From this evidence, they can at least hypothesize this:

- This file is dedicated to validating the correctness of the `fizzBuzz` function
- It's unlikely that the `fizzBuzz` implementation is in this file, or even this folder

### !callout-info

## Confidently Make Hypotheses

> As Leila works through this, they will need to make a lot of assumptions. Leila can take the time to fact-check all of her assumptions, which is a completely valid thing to do (and typically a good strategy for life). However, in this situation, Leila can _also_ confidently rely on their skills, intuition, context, and help from others to make theories about what's going on.

Reviewer: consistency
```suggestion
As Leila works through this, they will need to make a lot of assumptions. Leila can take the time to fact-check all of their assumptions, which is a completely valid thing to do (and typically a good strategy for life). However, in this situation, Leila can _also_ confidently rely on their skills, intuition, context, and help from others to make theories about what's going on.
```

<br/>

> "Maybe the `test` folder only holds test files, and we have a `.test.js` file for each function." Making theories like this will help Leila move forward in their learning. It will also help them correct themself and their working knowledge more easily!

Reviewer: separate the theory and the observation for impact.
```suggestion
"Maybe the `test` folder only holds test files, and we have a `.test.js` file for each function."

<br/>

Making theories like this will help Leila move forward in their learning. It will also help them correct themself and their working knowledge more easily!
```

### !end-callout

### Hypothesizing About `describe`

> Let's look at block of code that begins on the first line, and closes on the last line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's look at the block of code that begins on the first line, and closes on the last line.
```

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
describe('fizzBuzz', () => {
  // ...
});
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Even though we don't know what `describe` means here, we can see that its syntax looks similar to a function call with two arguments:

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
describe( ..., ...
);
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

> We can also see that the first argument is the string literal `'fizzBuzz'`. When Leila sees this, Leila questions, "What is this string literal used for?"

Reviewer: Split the general narration from Leila's monologue.
```suggestion
We can also see that the first argument is the string literal `'fizzBuzz'`.

When Leila sees this, Leila questions, "What is this string literal used for?"
```

> When scanning through the rest of this code, we don't see this string literal being used anywhere obviously, so they will pause on that question for now.

Reviewer: keep the focus on Leila through this paragraph
```suggestion
After scanning through the rest of the test code, they don't see any obvious place where this string literal is being used, so they set that question aside for the moment.
```

Reviewer 2: +1 to Ansel's rewording here :)

> The second argument seems to be a large, anonymous arrow function with zero parameters, that contains even more unfamiliar syntax.

Reviewer: use which for non-defining clause
```suggestion
The second argument seems to be a large, anonymous arrow function with zero parameters, which contains even more unfamiliar syntax.
```

Reviewer 2: I assume the answer's yes but just to be sure, have they been introduced to arrow functions somehow before now?

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
() => {
    // ...
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Let's approach the contents of this function piece-by-piece.

### Hypothesizing About `test`

Inside the anonymous function started in `describe`, there is a block of code that begins with `test()`.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
  test('returns Fizz on multiples of 3', () => {
    // ...
  });
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

This is also a function being invoked. This `test` function seems to take in two arguments, the string literal `'returns Fizz on multiples of 3'` and an anonymous arrow function.

Leila notices that this pattern feels very similar to the `describe` block. 🤔 They should keep that observation, because it's a good one!

### Arrange

Inside the next anonymous arrow function, we see the following code:

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
    // Arrange
    const num = 9;
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

It's a comment indicating an "Arrange" step and a `const` variable `num` assigned to the number `9`.

> Leila is an overthinker, and they could dig deeper into what this line means. However, this time, they will choose to make only one theory: the variable `num` will be used later in the test.

Reviewer: rephrase to avoid using overthinking in what sounds like a pejorative sense
```suggestion
Leila usually likes to deeply investigate any new concepts they encounter, and they could dig deeper into what this line means. However, this time, they decide to move on with the following hypothesis: the variable `num` will be used later in the test.
```

```js
    // Act
    const result = fizzBuzz(num);
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Leila recognizes this as the "Act" step in a test, where the behavior we're testing (a `fizzBuzz` function) should be "acted on," or invoked.

Here, we are invoking `fizzBuzz`, passing in `num`, and saving the return value into a `const` variable named `result`.

### Assert

Let's dive into the final line, which features some more unfamiliar syntax.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
    // Assert
    expect(result).toEqual('Fizz');
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Leila knows that the assert step is the step that determines whether a test passes or fails.

They've seen the `test` block include the string "returns Fizz on multiples of 3," which Leila suspects is relevant to the Assert step of this test.

Reading the line from left-to-right, it seems like `expect(result)` is also a function call. The function's name is `expect` and we're passing in `result`.

However, the line doesn't stop there. Leila sees `.toEqual('Fizz')`. Recalling other JavaScript syntax, Leila suspects that this is a function call, where the function is named `toEqual` and the argument is `'Fizz'`.

> It looks like this function call operates from an object. That object must be `expect(result)`.

Reviewer: `expect(result)` is not itself the object, but calling this returns some object that we use.
add a bit where Leila is ok with not knowing exactly what this object is, but moves forward with their deduction.
```suggestion
It looks like this function call operates on an object. That object must be whatever is returned from the call to `expect(result)`. Leila doesn't know exactly what this object is, but they can tell that it must have a method called `toEqual`!
```

> ### Reading it Out Loud
> 
> Leila can now take a step back and read this line overall. They notice a sentence that the code forms: "Expect the value of `result` to equal `'Fizz'`."

Reviewer: minor edits
```suggestion
### Reading It Out Loud

Leila can now take a step back and read this line overall. They notice a sentence formed by the code: "Expect the value of `result` to equal `'Fizz'`."
```

The test will pass if `result`'s value is `'Fizz'`, and fail if it isn't.

> 

Reviewer: suggest a callback to provide additional perspective on why it's okay to make all these assumptions: code is written by people for people and we want it to make sense!
```suggestion

### !callout-info

## Is It Safe to Jump to this Conclusion?

It may seem reckless to try reading this code as a sentence rather than code. After all, JavaScript doesn't know what any of these words mean, and it definitely doesn't know what a sentence is!

<br />

But we should remember that this test library was written by _people_ for other _people_ to use. They want their code to be understandable, and so they wrote it so that it makes intuitive sense, even before we have a deep technical understanding. We should attempt to write our own code in such an understandable style too!

### !end-callout

```

Author: this is brilliant and i love it a lot, thank you!!

## Multiple Tests in One Describe Block

> Leila just can't catch a break! After reading through the first test, Nadia is prompting Leila to continue reading.
> 
> However, Leila can use this opportunity to possibly validate or disprove some of their theories.

Reviewer: develop a bit more of the emotional flavor around this situation, and how Leila turns disappointment into additional learning
```suggestion
Leila really wants to get coding, but they just can't catch a break! After reading through the first test, Nadia presses Leila to continue with the next test.

Leila is disappointed, but then they realize they might be able to use this opportunity to validate or disprove some of their theories.
```

Author: This rules!!!!!!

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
describe('fizzBuzz', () => {
  test('returns Fizz on multiples of 3', () => {
    // Arrange
    const num = 9;

    // Act
    const result = fizzBuzz(num);

    // Assert
    expect(result).toEqual('Fizz');
  });

  test('returns Buzz on multiples of 5', () => {
    expect(fizzBuzz(25)).toEqual('Buzz');
  });
});
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

The first thing Leila notices is that the next test is a second `test` block, located in the same `describe` block.

> There aren't commas between the tests, because these tests are not in an object with comma-separated key-value pairs, nor are they in a comma-separated array.

Reviewer: I don't see why anyone would be expecting either of these to be true. Do we need to bring this up?
```suggestion
```

Author: Thinking about old JS Adagrams, where students had to go from the object to refactoring as a class, I felt I saw a lot of this confusion. That being said, I like the optimism that we don't need it ;)

Reviewer: Ah. That sounds like something that would need to unlearn only if they are first exposed to one-shot objects with methods... 😉

> The `test` block continues to be, ultimately, a function call: `test(..., ...);`

Reviewer: This is a different test block, so we can't say that it continues to be anything, since we are just looking at it now. However, it can be something _also_, with respect to the first test.
```suggestion
This `test` block also seems to be, ultimately, a function call: `test(..., ...);`
```

Reviewer 2: I like Ansel's suggested change but am confused about the "also". It isn't clear to me what text ahead of this the also is referring to. Unless I'm missing something obvious, I'd vote we remove "also"

Author: The "also" is referring to the first `test` block, which was mentioned to be ultimately a function call to `test()`. Still gonna remove the "also" to eliminate that confusion

```suggestion
This `test` block seems to be, ultimately, a function call: `test(..., ...);`
```

### First Argument of `test`

Leila sees that the first argument is another string literal, `'returns Buzz on multiples of 5'`. Now, Leila can draw a comparison to the other test, which passed in `'returns Fizz on multiples of 3'`.

Leila lets themself feel a little more confident in hypothesizing. They hypothesize that the first argument is a string that describes the intent of the test.

### Second Argument of `test`

Now, what's left for Leila to consider is the anonymous function.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```js
() => {
    expect(fizzBuzz(25)).toEqual('Buzz');
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Drawing also from the first unit test, Leila concludes:

1. This assert step begins with calling `expect(...)` and passing in a value.

>    - In the first test, the value was `result`, which was ultimately `fizzBuzz(9)`
>    - In this second test, the value is `fizzBuzz(25)`

Reviewer: additional precision around what these objects are and where they came from
```suggestion
   - In the first test, the value was `result`, which was assigned the result of `fizzBuzz(9)`
   - In this second test, the value is the result of calling `fizzBuzz(25)`
```

1. The line continues, chaining on `.toEqual(...)`
   - In the first test, the argument was `'Fizz'`
   - In this second test, the argument is `'Buzz'`

To summarize, this second test expects the value of `fizzBuzz(25)` to equal `'Buzz'`.

> ## Example on Replit.com

Reviewer: There seems to be a big problem with the Replit. The view of the replit that a non-owner sees is that summary view with the green button (I made a suggestion in the learning another language PR to include an image of that screen with some direction to Fork the replit to get to the same view as the the remaining images).

That should be fine foe most cases, but either the replit here is missing its test (strange since you got screenshots), OR forking does not bring the unit tests along... 😱😱😱😱😱

Is there a permission setting or something that can be toggled on the adacore repls so that they end up in the owner view, but without permanent change permissions? Is there a problem with the unit tests on this replit? If not, there's going to be a problem with distributing an environment that has tests using replit.

We can run a version of this test suite on [this Replit code snippet](https://replit.com/@adacore/FizzBuzz-With-Tests#index.js).

Replit.com supports Jest unit tests, although it has its own configurations to deal with. Let's purposely skip over those details in order to focus on the tests.

The tests in [this REPL](https://replit.com/@adacore/FizzBuzz-With-Tests#index.js) are already set up.

Navigate to the "Unit Tests" section, listed on the left-hand navigation menu.

> ![Replit UI that highlights the "Unit Tests" tab on the left-hand navigation bar](../assets/tests_tests_replit-highlight-test-nav.png)

Reviewer: adds caption
```suggestion
![Replit UI that highlights the "Unit Tests" tab on the left-hand navigation bar](../assets/tests_tests_replit-highlight-test-nav.png)  
_Fig. A Replit code snippet we will use for exploring JavaScript tests. The Unit tests panel is marked with a check mark icon._
```

The left pane now shows details about the existing test suite, with a list of existing tests.

> ![Replit UI that highlights a list of four unit tests relating to FizzBuzz](../assets/tests_tests_replit-test-list.png)

Reviewer: adds caption
```suggestion
![Replit UI that highlights a list of four unit tests relating to FizzBuzz](../assets/tests_tests_replit-test-list.png)  
_Fig. Our Replit session open to the Unit tests panel_
```

We can click into one of these tests and observe the contents of the test.

> ![Modal that shows the details of the unit test titled `multiples-of-three`, including its test contents](../assets/tests_tests_replit-test-detail.png)

Reviewer: adds caption
```suggestion
![Modal that shows the details of the unit test titled `multiples-of-three`, including its test contents](../assets/tests_tests_replit-test-detail.png)  
_Fig. The test content view that appears after clicking the `multiples-of-three` test_
```

We can run the tests using the "Run tests" button.

> Hopefully we see one failing test.

Reviewer: hopefully we're not relying on hope here. 😂 
```suggestion
We should see one failing test.
```

> ![Replit UI featuring test failure messages in the right-hand console](../assets/tests_tests_replit-test-failure.png)

Reviewer: adds caption
```suggestion
![Replit UI featuring test failure messages in the right-hand console](../assets/tests_tests_replit-test-failure.png)  
_Fig. The output of running our tests. The `non-multiples` test has failed, as shown in the console output, as well as the coloration in the Unit tests panel._ 
```

We can use the error messages to change our code and get the test to pass!

## Reading Jest Error Messages

Leila and Nadia need to read through the test failure and both get aligned with which test is failing, and how it's failing.

Consider this test failure message:

```
❌   non-multiples
Message: The function did not return the number itself on numbers that are not multiples of three or five
Stack Trace:
Error: expect(received).toEqual(expected)

Expected value to equal:
  4
Received:
  undefined

Difference:

  Comparing two different types of values. Expected number but received undefined.
```

| <div style="min-width:200px;"> Piece of Output </div> | Notes                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| ----------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `❌ non-multiples`                                    | This indicates that a test by the name or description of `non-multiples` is failing                                                                                                                     |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `❌ not-multiple-of-three-or-five`                                    | This indicates that a test by the name or description of `not-multiple-of-three-or-five` is failing                                                                                                                     |
```
The name of this test being so short is an anti-pattern, in my mind. I offer this change because I know you feel strongly about not presenting anti-patterns to students in the curriculum.

Reviewer 2: This is one of several changes that'd need to be made to fully carryout this change (including screenshots and changes to the repl itself)

Author: I'm gonna have to rework the whole replit situation-- during that time, I'll do a pass-through and update this test to this suggestion!

This curriculum focuses on Jest additionally because:

- It is widely adopted in modern JavaScript projects

> - It is built into [CodeSandbox](https://codesandbox.io)

Reviewer: acknowledge that we jumped to a completely different environment, but still tie this back to things we've seen (the reader _could_ implement this in replit if they so desired)
```suggestion
- It is built into several online editors, including [Replit.com](https://replit.com), which we have used before, as well as [CodeSandbox](https://codesandbox.io), which we'll explore a bit in this lesson.
```

To summarize, this second test expects the value of `fizzBuzz(25)` to equal `'Buzz'`.

## Example on CodeSandbox.io

We can run a version of this test suite on [this CodeSandbox project](https://codesandbox.io/s/fizzbuzz-with-tests-488sq?file=/test/fizzbuzz.test.js).

CodeSandbox.io is a platform for creating projects. We'll use this platform to read, write, and run our FizzBuzz unit tests.

> 

Reviewer: suggest a callout to give the reader a chance to orient themselves in the new space, to recognize what's similar, and what's different, and to set the tone that this is something we'll do often as we move through different environments.
```suggestion

### !callout-info

## CodeSandbox Is the Same, but Different

CodeSandbox provides an environment for editing code, just like Replit.com or even VS Code do. We should spend a few minutes looking around to identify where we can find some of the common features in any IDE. Some areas to keep an eye out for include:
- a list of files in the project
- a file editor view
- search tools
- output views
- configuration settings

<br />

We should feel comfortable exploring this environment until we feel like we have a general idea of where our main project areas are.

### !end-callout

```

> These projects need to be configured to use the Jest package. Let's purposely skip over those details in order to focus on the tests. The tests in [this CodeSandbox project](https://replit.com/@adacore/FizzBuzz-With-Tests#index.js) are already set up.

Reviewer: still had a replit link. I just copied the same link as the first codesandbox link. is that OK?
```suggestion
These projects need to be configured to use the Jest package. Let's purposely skip over those details in order to focus on the tests. The tests in [this CodeSandbox project](https://codesandbox.io/s/fizzbuzz-with-tests-488sq?file=/test/fizzbuzz.test.js) are already set up.
```

> ![CodeSandbox UI that shows the overall structure of the FizzBuzz project](../assets/tests_tests_sandbox-overview.png)  

Reviewer: fill out the alt text a bit
```suggestion
![CodeSandbox UI that shows the overall structure of the FizzBuzz project, including project files, editing views, and test output](../assets/tests_tests_sandbox-overview.png)  
```

_Fig. CodeSandbox UI that shows the overall structure of the FizzBuzz project_

This project has the following files:

> | <div style="min-width:215px;">File</div> | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |

Reviewer: this was wrapping a single character 😆 
```suggestion
| <div style="min-width:230px;">File</div> | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
```

| `package.json`                           | Used by [Node JS](https://nodejs.dev/) projects. Determines project details, such as project dependencies. Because we are not focusing on configuration, we will use this file to list our one project dependency, the `jest` package. |
| `src/fizzbuzz.js`                        | The source file where we define our `fizzBuzz` function.                                                                                                                                                                               |
| `test/fizzbuzz.test.js`                  | The test file where we define our `fizzBuzz` unit tests.                                                                                                                                                                               |

We can navigate between files using the left-hand navigation menu, under the header "Files."

We may want to collapse the surrounding sections, such as "Dependencies."

> ![CodeSandbox UI that highlights the file navigation pane](../assets/tests_tests_sandbox-files.png)  

Reviewer: fill out the alt text a bit
```suggestion
![CodeSandbox UI that highlights the file navigation pane, showing the fizzbuzz.js file in the src folder, the test folder, and the package.json file](../assets/tests_tests_sandbox-files.png)  
```

_Fig. CodeSandbox UI that highlights the file navigation pane_

To run the tests, we use the preview pane, which automatically appears on the right.

We can toggle the visibility of the preview pane by clicking the icon on the top right.

> ![CodeSandbox UI that highlights the icon that toggles the preview pane](../assets/tests_tests_preview-pane.png)  

Reviewer: fill out the alt text a bit (I also pushed an updated image)
```suggestion
![CodeSandbox UI that highlights the icon that toggles the preview pane. It looks like a small window with a play button. It is highlighted with a fuchsia square in this image.](../assets/tests_tests_preview-pane.png)  
```

_Fig. CodeSandbox UI that highlights the icon that toggles the preview pane_

When viewing the preview pane, instead of viewing the "Browser," we can view the "Tests."

> ![CodeSandbox UI that highlights the icon that runs the tests](../assets/tests_tests_run-test-icon.png)  

Reviewer: fill out the alt text a bit
```suggestion
![CodeSandbox UI that highlights the icon that runs the tests. It is a typical triangular play button icon shown to the far right of the Test Suites status information.](../assets/tests_tests_run-test-icon.png)  
```

_Fig. CodeSandbox UI that highlights the icon that runs the tests_

On the right side of the top bar, we see a refresh 🔄 icon. Clicking this icon reloads the tests, which is sometimes necessary for CodeSandbox. Next to it, we see a play ▶️ button. Clicking this icon runs the tests.

The tests automatically reload and re-run every time there is a change in the code.

A summary of the test results appears after running the tests. Details are output on the bottom-half.

We should see one failing test.

> ![CodeSandbox UI that highlights the summary of the test run](../assets/tests_tests_summary.png)  

Reviewer: fill out the alt text a bit
```suggestion
![CodeSandbox UI that highlights the summary of the test run. The fizzbuzz.test.js file has a failing test called 'returns Fizz on multiples of 3.' An excerpt of the failing test is shown beneath, with the line where the failure occurred bolded, and marked with a a '>' character.](../assets/tests_tests_summary.png)  
```

_Fig. CodeSandbox UI that highlights the summary of the test run_

> We can use the error messages to change our code and get the test to pass!

Reviewer: the errors can help us "figure out where" to make a change
```suggestion
We can use the error messages to figure out where to change our code and get the test to pass!
```
